Add `dotnet install` capability to the SDK and as a Standalone Executable. Install CLI UX. (#335)
dotnet/designs: proposed/dotnet-bootstrapper/dotnet-bootstrapper-path.md

# Integrating a 'dotnet' Bootstrapper with Visual Studio (PATH Issues)

## Introduction

> How can we enable an `nvm` or `rustUp` like experience for `dotnet`? In this document, the command to do so will be aliased as `bootstrapper`, and we will only discuss PATH concerns. This may be `dotnet` going forward, or something else.

Author: Hopefully Ive updated it to be more clear (full commit push with everything coming soon)

> One of the core differences in our ecosystem compared to other toolchains is the inclusion of .NET in VS. Visual Studio and the MSI or 'global' .NET Installer set the System `PATH` on Windows and not the user level `PATH`. The system `PATH` always takes precedence over the user `PATH`, which is how other toolchains manage user local install folders. Below are proposals to remedy this situation.

Author: Great feedback, I like this way of making the framing more concise. I tried to include more detail while keeping your improvements.

Please see the `Technical Details` section for more context.

## Proposals

### Update the Installers / Visual Studio

:star: A framing document and prototype made by the .NET SDK team relies on and suggests this proposal. We believe this to be the best proposal.

One option is to set the machine into a 'local' SDK mode that users could opt into when users engage with `bootstrapper` to do their first local install. This 'mode' would tell the system-wide installers (both `pkg` and `msi`) to not set the system `PATH`.

In this scenario:

> 1. When the user interfaces with the `bootstrapper`, to install an SDK, they are prompted about the change to `local` installs. They are also informed about the impact this has on VS and can pick an update cadence.

Author: Yeah, I can see that being better UX. The guidance we have is to check for updates daily. In theory we could also utilize patch tuesday but we often ship off schedule nowadays. I think instead, we may want to mention that it would be helpful to have a story in place for VS calling our bootstrapper to run updates when it launches, since if the user doesn't interact with the CLI, they wouldn't get those daily updates, but the SDK would still be used.

2. On Windows, a registry key is set in `HKLM` (the registry hive for local user contexts). `bootstrapper` must elevate to enable this registry edit when prompting the user.

> 📓 Technical Details:
> A registry key is preferred over an environment variable because it is an admin-protected context. We don't want user-local controllable behavior to influence/break the behavior of an administrative installer, as that is a security concern. A policy key may also be used, but a policy key is essentially equivalent to a registry key in this context.
>

> > On Unix, we could set this via a protected sentinel file.

Author: The mac PATH is a root protected file, so I think we need to do something in this scenario. A sentinel file may not be the best approach, but I think something similar is just and we dont need to decide that now.

3. Under step 2, the `PATH` is updated to a dotnet application host (dotnet.exe) that contains the local installs managed by `bootstrapper`. Visual Studio and the other installers will no longer set the System `PATH` until the registry key or sentinel change is reverted. The option to undo this would be available, by removing the key, perhaps via an `uninstall all` or `reset` CLI feature from `bootstrapper`. The exact semantics of such are not pertinent here.

> 4. The existing `global.json` `paths` feature would still enable other scenarios like for Visual Studio to specify any SDK. In this sense, it is already possible to enable local .NET SDKs to work with VS.

Reviewer: This seems a bit unclear to me.  The `paths` feature would still work, but it doesn't let Visual Studio specify an SDK.

Author: Ah, I think I had meant to enable VS to use an 'admin' SDK rather than a local one.

Author: Which doesn't work very well due to the lack of env variables explained below

> 5. The user is prompted to see if they would like to install the local versions of the administrative installs currently managed by Visual Studio/MU/Package Manager, as well as the update option they prefer for those installs (ala global.json `rollFoward` values, as described in the cli-experience document.)

Reviewer: I think it's clearer to use "channel" here.  If we have to change the term later then fine, but for now I think it makes it easier to understand.

```suggestion
5. The user is prompted to see if they would like to install the local versions of the administrative installs currently managed by Visual Studio/MU/Package Manager, as well as the update channel they prefer for those installs (ala global.json `rollFoward` values, as described in the cli-experience document.)
```

> 📓 Technical Details: Admin Install Detection
> We can check the registry key hive as Visual Studio includes a reference count of which SDKs it manages and the file system admin locations in other scenarios. This prevents disrupting Visual Studio functionality as the local installs would match all of the SDKs that it had previously depended upon. This does consume extra disk space. If the user installs a newer SDK, Visual Studio would use that SDK, which is consistent with current behavior.

> 📓 Technical Details: Update

> > Upon the action of step 5, we would need to take on the responsibility of updating these SDKs. Managing a daemon is resource-intensive, so it may not be optimal. SDL requirements specify a required update policy; we cannot hook into MU and IT administrators rely on administrative install behaviors. One approach is to mimic the update behavior of Visual Studio upon every interaction with `bootstrapper` by suggesting updates and asking the user to specify an update cadence when the new local mode is applied. IT administrators should be able to enforce a policy that requires a specific update cadence, and the provided update cadence should be compliant with SDL requirements, such as checking for updates on a daily cadence when the tool is used. Visual Studio would need to trigger this check as well to maintain compliance.

Reviewer: To start with, I believe it's enough to notify the user of available updates and allow them to install those updates (via an explicit action).  I don't think we need any sort of automatic update in order to comply with the SDK (or to have a good experience).

I do think that the update notifications should not be limited to interactions with the bootstrapper or installation related commands if we make them part of `dotnet`.  Typical `dotnet` development commands such as `dotnet build` should notify the user that an update is available.

I also don't think we need (at least to start with) any IT policy around this, beyond possibly disabling user installs entirely.  If IT wants to manage .NET installs, then they should probably be using admin installs.

#### Advantages and Disadvantages

The advantage of this is that dotnet installations created by `bootstrapper` would work even if Visual Studio updates. Another advantage of changing the behavior based on a user action is that this change would not break existing installations of VS or existing code/tooling scenarios without user interaction. It's then possible to educate the user about their decision to change the PATH behavior.

The disadvantage is that Visual Studio / other tooling would no longer be able to find its SDKs once this mode was enabled, so the SDK update that is included with VS would not take effect without additional action. The SDK included with VS is an administrative install, which is managed by MU. This means MU would also lose authority to update VS's SDKs; MU (Microsoft Update) and other related IT update mechanisms are tied to MSI or administrative installs, so there is no easy way to hook a local installation mechanism into that toolchain. This is addressed shortly.

> A disadvantage of this setup is that older .NET Installers that do not respect the setting would still interfere with `bootstrapper` by modifying the system `PATH`. (For example, the `pkg` installer uses `tee` which overwrites the `PATH` file rather than just appending to it.) While we can potentially service these installers, older versions would still cause this issue. Addressing this comprehensively would require modifying the application host or `dotnet.exe`, which is not achievable within the .NET 10 timeframe and would need to be targeted for .NET 11. The advantage is that the application host always runs on the latest version, which would enable it to handle older installers appropriately.

Reviewer: This disadvantage doesn't apply as much as it may seem.  The installer component that sets the path is the one that lays out dotnet.exe and hostfxr, which updates in-place to the latest version.  So as long as any admin version of .NET 10 was installed, installing or updating an earlier version of .NET would not update this component and hence wouldn't modify the system PATH.

Author: I'm unsure of the technical aspects of this so I've reflected that in the doc, this is interesting

Author: Thanks for that context, I will update the document.

Reviewer 2: > There is a separate installer for host FXR and the host. The host MSI installs dotnet.exe and the component responsible for the PATH.

Are these part of Runtime installer or SDK installer? For example, if I install ".NET Runtime" or ".NET Desktop Runtime" only, do I still get `dotnet` on PATH?

Can these PATH modifications affect non-SDK scenarios? If the PATH is modified as part Runtime installer, it is likely that there are applications out there that depend on dotnet.exe to be on the path, and switching the machine to local SDK mode may break them in various ways.

Author: >Can these PATH modifications affect non-SDK scenarios 

Yes, there are a lot of security boundaries we would have to consider w.r.t runtimes, such as another account relying on the system wide PATH for a runtime like described above.

> 📓 Technical Detail: VS Behavior with Local Installs:
>
> Finally, we should consider where else VS may be impacted. Some code within Visual Studio is hard-coded to use the administrative installs, such as the template engine. The template engine is a standalone component, and it is ok for this tool to run with the admin logic.

> ### Multi-level-lookup
> 
> `DOTNET_MULTILEVEL_LOOKUP` was designed to enable or disable the host/muxer/`dotnet.exe`'s ability to find SDKs or Runtimes in other locations. We could re-enable the muxer to look specifically at the directory of local installs that are placed by `bootstrapper`, as proposed to be `DOTNET_HOME` in the other specification, [`dotnet-bootstrapper-cli-experience.md`](./dotnet-bootstrapper-cli-experience.md).
> 
> This would enable the lookup to work without modification to the `PATH`. We could add back this feature in a limited capacity and only with explicit user consent. However, `DOTNET_MULTILEVEL_LOOKUP` was deprecated and removed in .NET 7 due to user confusion (when it would find global SDKs in a user local context) and for performance reasons. The `host` team and others indicated that this feature presented significant challenges when it was available. When installers set conflicting paths, it creates coordination issues between different installation mechanisms, so it may be better to view this as an installer problem like above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Allow user and admin installs to work together

Instead of switching to a mode where only user installs are available, we could have a way that both user installs and admin installs would be accessible.  This would reduce the impact to Visual Studio, essentially installing a user install of .NET would be no different than installing the same version as an admin install.  In either case, installing a new version would simply make an additional SDK version available, without removing access to any versions already installed.

We had a feature called multi-level lookup that supported something similar to this.  It was removed in .NET 7 because it was confusing and unexpected behavior, among other reasons.  We believe we could add a new feature that would allow local and admin installs to be used together, but that would avoid some of the issues that multi-level lookup had.

However, it would still add complexity and given the negative experience around multi-level lookup, it might not completely mitigate all the issues.  So we propose to go with the simpler option of allowing the user to switch to a mode where user installs are used instead of admin installs.  If we get significant feedback that users would like to have both types available together, we can consider adding support for that.
```

### Require `paths` in `global.json`

In this approach, we prioritize defined and replicable behavior. System administrator installs are created in predictable locations, especially those from Visual Studio and/or package manager feeds.

What we could do is look for those installations and decline to do anything when a user tries to run `bootstrapper` if they are present on disk. The error message would point the user toward leveraging the `sdk: paths []` option in their project or repositories `global.json` file, which would specify to the host or `dotnet.exe` where to look for the installs of the .NET SDK. The host is already aware of this as of .NET 10.

> 📓 Usage Statistic:
> Only ~4% of users are on a `global.json` according to internal metrics, so this gesture will create additional work when using `dotnet` for a large number of customers.

> The downside of this approach is that it creates an additional step for a significant number of .NET users. Requiring extra configuration files to function properly presents a usability challenge and increases the barrier to entry for new users. However, the `paths` feature itself provides considerable value for repository-specific SDK management, which is why it has already been implemented and made available.

Reviewer: Another downside is that as currently implemented, the `paths` feature only supports repo installs and not user installs (because it doesn't support variables/tokens to point to something like the home or LOCALAPPDATA fodler.  This means that different repos would not be able to share installations of the .NET SDK, wasting disk space for developers that use multiple repos.

On the other hand, if `bootstrapper` set the system `PATH`, it would modify the behavior of Visual Studio, as Visual Studio would no longer find its installs. This could be considered a breaking change to Visual Studio. In this scenario, Visual Studio may begin to run on a different SDK than the one it shipped with, based on whichever SDKs the user has installed that can be used with the user project (based on the major.minor version of .NET and host resolution logic for the specific context.) This is already possible today by installing a different administrative SDK that is newer than the one Visual Studio has. However, it is not possible to install a downgrade of an administrative install in the specific version-set without uninstalling the SDK owned by Visual Studio first. This also means that updates of the SDK that Visual Studio includes would no longer take effect within Visual Studio, as the update mechanism would need to be handled by `bootstrapper`.

An additional concern would be the `source-built` SDKs and the `pkg` installer.

> There have been several methods suggested to handle this, which are listed below.

Reviewer: I think you can remove this line, I think it made sense when this section was at the beginning of the document, but not now.
